the first presidential inauguration to
be held at the West front of the United
States Capitol takes place January 20
1981 with the inauguration of Ronald
Wilson Reagan as 40th President of the
United States
while nearly all presidents beginning
with Thomas Jefferson have been
inaugurated at the Capitol the East
front facing the Supreme Court has been
the traditional sign the unusually warm
and pleasant day begins with White House
reception for the participants including
vice president and mrs. Walter Mondale
vice president-elect and mrs. George
Bush representative Robert Michael and
Senator Howard Baker members of the
Joint Congressional Committee on
inaugural ceremonies
president mrs. Carter and president
elect and mrs. Ronald Reagan who are
accompanied to the White House by
Senator Mark Hatfield chairman of the
inaugural committee and representative
John Rhodes
at the capital the crowd gathers guests
on the presidential platform includes
senator Barry Goldwater Republican
presidential nominee in 1964 general
David Jones chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff
Senator Paul Laxalt campaign chairman
for president-elect Reagan General Omar
Bradley
mrs. Nelson Rockefeller and the families
of the vice president-elect and
president-elect
the procession of official guests begins
with the House of Representatives led by
the Dean of the House
Jamie Whitman and an official carrying
the mace traditional symbol that the
house is in session
the diplomatic corps attends embalmed
the nation's governor's enter the
inaugural sight
Strom Thurmond President Pro Tem of the
Senate the secretary and the chaplain
lead the procession of senators
at the White House the presidential
party departs for the Capitol at 11:05
a.m. 25 minutes before the ceremony is
to begin
the presidential party receives the
traditional greeting from the Senate
sergeant-at-arms
Howard Leoben will and the house
sergeant at arms
Benjamin Guthrie
on the other side of the Capitol the
last of the procession of official
guests are being seated
the Supreme Court
mrs. Mondale and mrs. Bush
spouses of members of the joint
inaugural committee mrs. Howard Baker
mrs. Robert seabird mrs. Robert Michael
mrs. Jim Wright and mrs. play burn path
the first lady and the future first lady
are escorted to their places of honor by
mrs. mark Hatfield mrs. Thomas P O'Neill
and mrs. John Rhodes
to the flourish of hail to the chief' by
the Marine Band the president's own
President Carter and vice president
Mondale are escorted to the platform by
members of the inaugural committee
Speaker Thomas P O'Neill senator
Claiborne Pell representative Jim Wright
and Senator Robert Seberg
next Vice president-elect Bush takes his
place escorted by representative Michael
senator Baker and the Senate and House
sergeants and arms
the drums and bugles signaled the moment
the record crowd of over 100,000 has
been awaiting the entrance of
president-elect Ronald Reagan the
procession is led by Tom Deckard
executive director of the inaugural
committee the president-elect is
accompanied by chairman mark Hatfield
members of the inaugural committee and
the House and Senate sergeant's at arm's
welcome to the historic first
inauguration under the panoply of the
West front of our nation's capital the
40th President of the United States
takes his oath of office in the day when
a tide of New Hope is rising throughout
our land as an affirmation of this new
hope let us all join Michael Ryan of the
United States Marines in singing a verse
of America the Beautiful do you all join
and reach out and grasp the hand of your
neighbor and let us be let this be a
symbol of our unity
oh Beautiful for spacious skies for
amber waves are great
artist
please be seated
this new hope is not promoted in
lyricism but is tough and realistic hope
which is the instinct of the soul the
Energizer of the mind for our invocation
today I present president-elect and mrs.
Reagan's pastor Reverend Don Mumma of
the Bel Air Presbyterian Church in Los
Angeles will you please stand
wherever you might be here and in the
United States and around the world
please bow with me in this moment of
solemn dedication in prayer
gracious God our Father we need you
today maybe as never before we have not
lived up to our personal or national
potential we have seen our world from
our own selfish parochial point of view
we have lived as though everything
depended upon us we confess our sin and
seek your forgiveness in this historic
moment we would pray for our president
elect Ronald Reagan we also pray for
Brice vice president elect George Bush
the cabinet and all others who are in
positions of leadership in this new
administration may they measure well the
shortness of time and the length of
eternity may they see all people and
things and nations from your point of
view we thank you O God for the release
of our of the hostages and for all of
those who have made this moment possible
and so in this moment of new beginnings
our hearts beat with a cadence of pride
in our country and hope in its future
help us to stand proudly as American
citizens and face every challenge with a
confidence born of your spirit and
humbly touched by your love and grace so
to this end we commit ourselves in to
this end we pray in the name of the lord
of lords and King of Kings even Jesus
Christ amen amen
please be seated
my fellow citizens
will you please join me at this time in
wishing good health and happiness
to president and mrs. Carter and the
vice president and mrs. Mondale
I now present the Associate Justice of
the United States Supreme Court the
Honorable Potter Stewart who will
administer the oath of office to the
vice president-elect
you put your left hand on the Bible
raise your right hand
repeat after me hi George Herbert Walker
Bush hi George Herbert Walker Bush do
solemnly swear do solemnly swear that I
will support and defend the Constitution
of the United States that I will support
and defend the Constitution of the
United States against all enemies
foreign and domestic
against all enemies foreign and domestic
that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the same
allegiance to the same that I take this
obligation freely that I take this
obligation freely without any mental
reservation or purpose of evasion
without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion that I will well and
faithfully discharge that I well will
well and faithfully discharge the duties
of the office the duties of the office
on which I am about to enter on which I
am about to enter so help you God so
help me God
god bless you George
the United States Marine Band will now
play our national hymn god of our
fathers
citizens I now present the Chief Justice
of the United States the Honorable
Warren burger who will administer the
oath of office to the president-elect
governor are you prepared to take the
constitutional oath I am if you place
your left hand on the Bible and raise
your right hand and repeat after me i
Ronald Reagan do solemnly swear i Ronald
Reagan do solemnly swear that I will
faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States that I
will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States and will
to the best of my ability and will to
the best of my ability preserve protect
and defend
preserve protect and defend the
Constitution of the United States the
Constitution of the United States so
help you God so help me God
Americans got you loser
the President of the United States
thank you
Thank You senator Hatfield mr. chief
justice mr. president vice president
Bush vice president Mondale senator
Baker speaker O'Neill
Reverend Mumma and my fellow citizens to
a few of us here today this is a solemn
and most momentous occasion and yet in
the history of our nation it is a
commonplace occurrence the orderly
transfer of authority is called for in
the Constitution routinely takes place
as it has for almost two centuries and
few of us stop to think how unique we
really are in the eyes of many in the
world this every four years ceremony we
accept as normal is nothing less than a
miracle mr. president I want our fellow
citizens to know how much you did to
carry on this tradition by your gracious
cooperation in the transition process
you have shown a watching world that we
are a united people pledge to
maintaining a political system which
guarantees individual liberty to a
greater degree than any other and I
thank you and your people for all your
help in maintaining the continuity which
is the bulwark of our Republic
the business of our nation goes forward
these united states are confronted with
an economic affliction of great
proportions we suffer from the longest
and one of the worst sustained
inflation's in our national history it
distorts our economic decisions
penalizes thrift and crushes the
struggling young and the fixed income
elderly alike it threatens to shredder
the lives of millions of our people idle
industries have cast workers into
unemployment human misery and personal
indignity those who do work are denied a
fair return for their labor by a tax
system which penalizes successful
achievement and keeps us from
maintaining full productivity but great
as our tax burden is it has not kept
pace with public spending for decades we
have piled deficit upon deficit
mortgaging our future and our children's
future for the temporary convenience of
the present to continue this long trend
is to guarantee tremendous social
cultural political and economic
upheavals you and I as individuals can
by borrowing live beyond our means but
for only a limited period of time why
then should we think that collectively
as a nation we are not bound by that
same limitation we must act today in
order to preserve tomorrow and let there
be no misunderstanding we are going to
begin to act beginning today
the economic ills we suffered have come
upon us over several decades they will
not go away in days weeks or months but
they will go away they will go away
because we as Americans have the
capacity now as we've had in the past to
do whatever needs to be done to preserve
this last and greatest bastion of
freedom in this present crisis
government is not the solution to our
problem
government is the problem
from time to time we've been tempted to
believe that society has become too
complex to be managed by self-rule that
government by an elite group is superior
to government for by and of the people
well if no one among us is capable of
governing himself then who among us has
the capacity to govern someone else all
of us together in and out of government
must bear the burden the solutions we
seek must be equitable with no one group
singled out to pay a higher price we
hear much of special interest groups
while our concern must be for a special
interest group that has been too long
neglected it knows no sectional
boundaries or ethnic and racial
divisions and it crosses political party
lines it is made up of men and women who
raise our food patrol our streets man
our minds and factories teach our
children keep our homes and Heelys when
we're sick professionals industrialists
shopkeepers clerks cabbies and truck
drivers they are in short we the people
this breed called Americans will this
administration's objective will be a
healthy vigorous growing economy that
provides equal opportunities for all
Americans with no barriers born of
bigotry or discrimination putting
America back to work means putting all
Americans back to work
ending inflation means freeing all
Americans from the terror of runaway
living costs all must share in the
productive work of this new beginning
and all must share in the bounty of a
revived economy with the idealism and
Fair Play which are the core of our
system and our strength we can have a
strong and prosperous America at peace
with itself and the world
so as we begin
let us take inventory we are a nation
that has a government not the other way
around and this makes us special among
the nations of the earth our government
has no power except that granted it by
the people it is time to check and
reverse the growth of government which
shows signs of having grown beyond the
consent of the governed it is my
intention to curb the size and influence
of the federal establishment and to
demand recognition of the distinction
between the powers granted to the
federal government and those reserved to
the States or to the people
all of us all of us need to be reminded
that the federal government did not
create the states the states created the
federal government now so there will be
no misunderstanding it's not my
intention to do away with government it
is rather to make it work work with us
not over us to stand by our side not
ride on our back government can and must
provide opportunity not smother it
foster productivity not stifle it if we
look to the answer mister why for so
many years we achieved so much prospered
as no other people on earth it was
because here in this land we unleash the
energy and individual genius of man to a
greater extent than has ever been done
before freedom and the dignity the
individual have been more available and
assured here than in any other place on
earth the price for this freedom at
times has been high but we have never
been unwilling to pay that price it is
no coincidence that our present troubles
parallel and our proportionate for the
intervention and intrusion in our lives
that result from unnecessary and
excessive growth of government it is
time for us to realize that we are too
great a nation to limit ourselves to
small dreams we're not as some would
have us believe doomed to an inevitable
decline I do not believe in a fate that
will fall on us no matter what we do I
do believe in a fate that will fall on
us if we do nothing so with all the
creative energy at our command
let us begin an era of national renewal
let us renew our determination our
courage and our strength and let us
renew our faith and our hope we have
have every right to dream heroic dreams
those who say that we're in a time when
there are no heroes they just don't know
where to look you can see heroes every
day going in and out of factory gates
others a handful a number produce enough
food to feed all of us and then the
world beyond you meet heroes across a
counter and they're on both sides of
that counter there are entrepreneurs
with faith in themselves and faith in an
idea who create new jobs new wealth and
opportunity they're individuals and
families who take taxes support the
government and whose voluntary gifts
support Church charity culture art and
education their patriotism is quiet but
deep their values sustain our national
life now I have used the words they and
their in speaking of these heroes I
could say you and your because I'm
addressing the heroes of whom I speak
you the citizens of this blessed land
your dreams your hopes your goals are
going to be the dreams the hopes and the
goals of this administration so help me
God
we shall reflect the compassion that is
so much a part of your makeup how can we
love our country and not love our
countrymen and loving them reach out a
hand when they fall heal them when
they're sick and provide opportunity to
make them self sufficient so they will
be equal in fact and not just in theory
can we solve the problems confronting us
well the answer is an unequivocal
emphatic yes
to paraphrase Winston Churchill I did
not take the oath I've just taken with
the intention of presiding over the
dissolution of the world's strongest
economy in the days ahead I will propose
removing the roadblocks that have slowed
our economy and reduced productivity
steps will be taken aimed at restoring
the balance between the various levels
of government progress may be slow
measured in inches and feet not miles
but we will progress it is time to
reawaken this industrial giant to get
government back within its means and to
lighten our punitive tax burden and
these will be our first priorities and
on these principles there will be no
compromise
on the eve of our struggle for
independence a man who might have been
one of the greatest among the founding
fathers dr. Joseph Warren president of
the Massachusetts Congress said to his
fellow Americans our country is in
danger but not to be despaired of on you
depend the fortunes of America you are
to decide the important question which
upon which rests the happiness and the
liberty of millions yet unborn act
worthy of yourselves well I believe we
the Americans of today are ready to act
worthy of ourselves ready to do what
must be done to ensure happiness and
liberty for ourselves our children and
our children's children and as we renew
ourselves here in our own land we will
be seen as having greater strength
throughout the world we will again be
the exemplar of freedom and a beacon of
hope for those who do not now have
freedom to those neighbors and allies
who share our freedom we will strengthen
our historic ties and assure them of our
support and firm commitment we will
match loyalty with loyalty we will
strive for mutually beneficial relations
we will not use our friendship to impose
on their sovereignty for our own
sovereignty is not for sale as for the
enemies of freedom those who are
potential adversaries they will be
reminded that peace is the highest
aspiration of the American people we
will negotiate for it sacrifice for it
we will not surrender for it now or ever
our forbearance should never be
misunderstood our reluctance for
conflicts should not be misjudged as a
failure of will when action is required
to preserve our national security we
will act we will maintain sufficient
strength to prevail if need be knowing
that if we do so we have the best chance
of never having to use that strength
above all we must realize that no
Arsenal or no weapon in the Arsenal's of
the world is so formidable as the will
and moral courage of free men and women
it is a weapon our adversaries in
today's world do not have it is a weapon
that we as Americans do have let that be
understood by those who practice
terrorism and prey upon their neighbors
I'm
I'm told that tens of thousands of
prayer meetings are being held on this
day and for that I'm deeply grateful we
are a nation under God and I believe God
intended for us to be free it would be
fitting and good I think if on each
inaugural day in future years it should
be declared a day of prayer this is the
first time in our history that this
ceremony has been held as you've been
told on this west front of the Capitol
standing here one faces a magnificent
Vista opening up on this city's special
beauty and history at the end of this
open mall are those shrines to the
Giants on whose shoulders we stand
directly in front of me the monument to
a monumental man
George Washington father of our country
a man of humility who came to greatness
reluctantly he led America out of
revolutionary victory into infant
nationhood off to one side
the stately memorial to Thomas Jefferson
a declaration of independence flames
with his eloquence and then beyond the
reflecting pool the dignified columns of
the Lincoln Memorial whoever would
understand in his heart the meaning of
America will find it in the life of
Abraham Lincoln beyond those moment
those monuments to heroism is the
Potomac River and on the far shore the
sloping hills of Arlington National
Cemetery with its row upon row of simple
white markers bearing crosses or Stars
of David they add up to only a tiny
fraction of the price that has been paid
for our freedom each one of those
markers is a monument to the kind of
hero I spoke of earlier their lives
ended in places called Bella wood the
Argonne
Omaha Beach Salerno and halfway around
the world on Guadalcanal Tarawa pork
chop hill the Chosun reservoir and in a
hundred rice paddies and jungles of a
place called Vietnam under one such
marker lies a young man Martin
tripped-out who left his job in a small
town barber shop in 1917 to go to France
with the famed rainbow division there on
the Western Front he was killed trying
to carry a message between battalions
under heavy artillery fire
we're told that on his body was found a
diary
on the Flyleaf under the heading my
pledge he had written these words
America must win this war therefore I
will work I will save I will sacrifice I
will endure
I will fight cheerfully and do my utmost
as if the issue of the whole struggle
depended on me alone the crisis we're
facing today does not require of us the
kind of sacrifice that Martin treptower
won so many thousands of others were
called upon to make it does require
however our best effort and our
willingness to believe in ourselves and
to believe in our capacity to perform
great deeds to believe that together
with God's help we can and will resolve
the problems which now confront us and
after all why shouldn't we believe that
we are Americans god bless you and thank
you
will you remain standing please the
Joint Congressional Committee on the
inauguration and all the members of the
United States Congress are honored that
you have come here for this great
occasion today and as we close now with
the benediction offered by Reverend
Mumma that will be followed by the
singing of the star-spangled banner by
mrs. Juanita Booker
may the Lord bless you and keep you may
the Lord make his face to shine upon you
and be gracious unto you may the Lord
lift up the light of his countenance
upon you and give you peace both now and
forevermore amen
oh say can you see by the dawn's what so
proudly we
Oh Twilight
whose broad stripes and bright stars
through the air
the SMAW
although parts
it was so gallant history
the road
that tower was due
hey does that star-spangled banner yeah
all the land
Oh
will you agree once more our president
and mrs. Reagan
President Carter vice president Mondale
their families and aides depart the
capital for the trip to Andrews Air
Force Base and Plains Georgia
the house wing of the Capitol President
Reagan brings tremendous news to the
guests with thanks to Almighty God I
have been given a tagline the get off
line that everyone wants the end of a
toast or a speech or anything else some
30 minutes ago the planes bearing our
prisoners left Iranian airspace
before departing the Capitol the
president pauses to review troops from
all services under the command of Major
General Robert archers chairman of the
Armed Forces Inaugural committee
the presidential motorcade leaves the
capitol grounds for the trip down
Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House
where the president views the inaugural
parade
this year's parade lasts one hour
considerably shorter than in 1977 more
than 300,000 people lined the parade
route
twenty-five bands including the high
school band from the president's
hometown of Dixon Illinois floats and 54
marching groups participate in the
parade
a total of over eight thousand Americans
the parade ends as dusk approaches and
over 40,000 people prepared to attend
novel ball the grand finale of the 1981
inaugural festivities